---
title: Happy to be Here
author: Joshua Bautista
date: '2024-08-12'
categories:
  - Journal
tags:
  - Reflection
  - IRL
  - IMO
---

# IMO Journal

Man, it’s over now. Just like that a good part of what I spent my highschool life doing has come to a close. I did it, I competed at the IMO, I got an HM which is definitely not what I would’ve wanted but getting it has definitely shaped me in many ways I never imagined it would. Let me first go over what happened.

**Day 1 (Transit):**

We gather at the airport and take some pics and scream some things in public while taking pictures. It gets the crowd’s attention and I was never a fan of that. I ask the others what they are gonna do on the plane, Luke says he’s gonna sleep and most of the others agree. I talk about all the oly that I wanted to do on the plane, I was planning to mock the RMM that just happened this year. That did not go as planned. Our first flight was from PH to Shanghai which went pretty smoothly, most of the others slept but while I was awake I managed to grab some cool pics of the sunrise. 

We land in Shanghai and me and Alvann watch Jerome practice memorizing a deck of cards for some reason (in a day after we land he somehow still remembered the order… what a guy). The others discuss the shortlist and their requests for our team leader. Alvann says he wants easy combi, I said so too and that I also want no ineq. Jerome proceeds with the following list:

 - P3 combi
 - no standard ineq
 - and two other requests that I forget LMAO I think p5 geo

After this I choose not to join most of the conversation and decide instead to play some cult of the lamb. I don’t play too much and soon after just join them in their discussion. We then get on the plane. I was not ready for the pain I would experience on this plane.

I sit again next to Nur in the window seat, usually I think this is good but here there is not enough leg room for a big guy like me and so I start off with incredibly uncomfortable legs. We get a few hours in and for the most part we have been sleeping on and off. We get our first meal when I start to notice that my stomach is starting to hurt, I never used the restroom so this was kinda expected. I decide to do the great idea of holding it in for the next few hours, attempting to doze off but never fully succeeding. I was watching D20 at the time (2nd season of fantasy high) and did my best to keep up with the story but my stomach was killing me. I didn’t want to get up and ask them to move, it seemed to much like a hassle, but as I would recall now that was certainly the wrong move. 

After the most painful 12 hours of my life we get off the plane and I hurry to a restroom. The first restroom I find was so dirty and cramped that I chose to look for the next one. We then get stuck in immigration for like 30 minutes while I talk to luke to try to get my mind off of it. After maybe another hour I find a restroom, from which I am not able to shit. At this point I go buy some water from a cafe nearby and take some medicine (I should’ve done this way earlier). We then get escorted to the coach in which Luke’s mom joins us somehow. I thought this coach would take 30 mins… It took 3 hours. We arrive at the place at 10 pm, to which I am informed I will live in a completely different flat from my team. I didn’t really know what a flat was so I feared the worst in that I would have to share the restroom with complete strangers, luckily this was not the case and I was able to take the most awaited shit of my life. I then head to sleep.

**Day 2 Calm before:**

Not much happens this day. We learn of where the food is, luckily it’s right next to our apartment. I infact wake up too late to eat with my team but Nur comes and gets me. After a rather uneventful day, I go back to my room to sleep. The first 2 hours goes well, I almost fall asleep like 5 times but then I find myself getting more and more uncomfortable. I am too focused on everything, my mind begins to race, and I start to notice the mucus in the back of my throat. I do not get any sleep. I call my mom, she tells me a bunch of things I can do, but I never ended up sleeping. I begin to hype myself up as I go into the first day of the contest with absolutely no sleep.

**Day 3-4 IMO:**

On the first day, I have absolutely no expectations of the contest. We file into the exam hall and I start doing a technique I found on youtube hours prior to look at the top of my eyelids to keep me awake. I chew on my spicy ginger chew as the contest starts and I stare at what should be a trivial alg, a strange NT, and what looks to be a combi that me and jerome did in training. At first I wrote beatty’s on my scratch, seeing the irrational, but this gets me no where. As I begin to stress about whether or not I will even get a problem solve I begin to lock in. I write down the first thing that comes to mind, a sequence of when the b{a} first becomes greater than k for some integer k. After 4 hours of fiddling with bounds I get it to work… I meet up with everyone and first I find Nur and he seems really positive. I presume this is because he got at least p1 and p2, but as I would soon find out this was because he got p1 and was trying to stay positive. When we meet up in their flat we discuss how we all did. Most of us only got p1 but alvann says he got both p1 and p2, which was incredible. We go to eat lunch and right after I elect to go alone to my room and sleep. I pass out as soon as I get to my bed.

On the second day, I come in noting that I have an order of magnitude more sleep than I did the day prior (I claimed 1 hour of sleep to seem reasonable). We enter the exam hall and the contest begins. i first try P5, at first I confuse myself thinking the answer is 3, then quickly convince myself that this was a fake solve and tried looking for different bounds. I then move on to p4 for about 2 hours until I finally draw the intersection of the two tangents and instinctually realize it lies on AI. I then go back to P5, convincing myself that the answer is log 2, then proceed to try to fix the details of the log 2 approach until the timer runs out and I wish for partials. I hear the people behind me saying “I thought it was log 2 as well, but no it’s actually just 3! It’s so troll, I found it at the last part of the exam.” I got worried for a second but convince myself that they have faked themselves out. I meet up with the others… and to my surprise jerome and luke found the construction for 3 and were telling us that it was 3. I lost my mind afterwards, but then something inside clicked with me. Given everything that happened, everything that had led up to this moment, I was fine with how I did. I realized that I probably didn’t have a chance at a medal but I was happy with how I did. It did sting for a bit that I wrote 3 on my paper with a question mark but never submitted it, but that’s how it goes I suppose. At this point we believe that only Jerome and Luke got p4 and p5 and everyone else got p4. The day ends rather uneventfully, where we go the XTX hub, grab some snacks, hang out for a while, and then go back to the rooms. Around this point I hang out with Luke quite a bit and we talk quite a bit.

**Day 5-6 The excursions:**

We didn’t get the oxford reserved so we miss out on that tour, but instead we go to stone henge and Bletchley. A lot of this is rather unremarkable, however I did lose my team towards the end and that made them be a bit late to the coach. I apologized for that. We also got to see a real enigma machine. Nur joined us for the stone henge but elected to stay out for the Bletchley park tour. From this point on Nur decides to not really join any of the events. We guess that this is because he wasn’t too well with his performance, and this was right, but we didn’t know to what extent.

Me and Luke share a lot of conversations at this point, about the problems, about some stories within school drama, some weird discord groups he’s been apart of, making jokes about Alvann smiling all the time and being a small version of sir Kerish, about how Jerome and Ephraim act, etc. I find Luke to be the most normal and sane person to talk to during all of this and I feel significantly closer to him. I also play a bit of celeste, it is already a really good game. The 3b1b talk was good but felt rushed, Simon Singh was honestly quite boring, and the Open Mic with Matt Parker was a blast, but I felt a sense of worry for if ever my team got picked… I was not excited to see what was about to happen. It never did thankfully to me. We also end up rushing this game of tiling a pegged 6x6 with some polynominoes ≤ 4. 

**Day 7-8 Center of Bath and Closing:**

Around this point I find out from a lunch conversation with Nur that he in fact never solved P4… I realize how much this must have hurt for him being a G main and am also shocked that he didn’t get it knowing how strong of a contestant he is. Most of my talks with him end up becoming about his performance because of this and I deeply regret taking this route. I spill this to Luke and some point and he is equally as shocked. We go to center of bath to meet Enrico Martinez and he seems really fun. I regret not talking to him more though my feet were in pain and I couldn’t focus. We mostly talk and walk around, at one point we go into this souvernir store where I pick up the coolest chalice that I have ever seen, a feather pen, and a stuffed bear that I might give to ari. We also stop at a tesco for too long because of course we do. My phone dies incredibly quickly. We walk and walk and wait at the bus stop for like an hour before the bus came, my feet were burning at this point. When we come back, Luke and Alvann tell me about these toys they got from the XTX hub, I rush over and grab 3. They tell me they got more so I grab some more. We then come up with a problem concerning flat loops involving them that none of us bother to solve.

Throughout all of this Luke tells me about this website that he wants to start and I opt in and now we are writing it together… maybe. I confirm with my mom that I am in fact getting a drum kit and that’s crazy I cant wait for that, and so much other stuff that I am forgetting.

I wake up today and meet up with no one. I walk to eat breakfast by myself and I see no one, I end up walking looking for the student union and I don’t find it, but I do find this incredibly beautiful park with a fountain which I sit at for a while. Walking here I tripped hard on my bad foot and hurt my knee, so it was nice to sit and watch for a bit. I begin to message Mark Justin about making the IMO team and how he has been, I stare at the fountain and realize everything that’s happened, the person I am now, and everything comes into frame. I am here, I am me, I made it here and I did how I did. So much lead up to this point, and it’s done now.. But there’s another next year I tell myself and I start getting super hyped. I think this is the most hyped I’ve been for something over like a long period of time. That hype for the next IMO has not gone away. 

I come back to lunch and ephraim asks if he can buy some of my tangle toys, I’m not a *material gurl* so I just give some to him and he thanks me. We let Alvann in on the website and he gives some good comments, so does Jerome. The medalists split up from the HMs so I split up with them and hang out in my room for a good hour. I get ready a bit late but as it turns out our coaches were a bit late too, so it works out. Me and Nur are now paired for the remainder of the day, being the HMs, and we make some jokes, he tells me a bit of how he’s been but not a lot, and thats how the day goes during the awarding. We talk a bit about all the other people going on, he says how nostalgic it feels looking at the stage and I should’ve picked up how much it meant to him and how much it pained him to look at other people going while he sat at the side. When we get back I stick mostly by Jerome, Alvann and Ephraim as they head to the party, I forget my lanyard so I have to walk alll the way back with my bad foot. That was a pain. I then head over and meet up with Luke, get some pizza, lose Luke, find Alvann and talk to him for a bit, get some drinks, find Luke again, and we head back to the place to give Nur the adapter he was asking for. When we get back we just hang out in the common room for a bit, play some cards, and then Luke says something like “eugh it’s over now” while the fireworks are going off and it hurts Nur and he rushes to his room. I was getting my cards at this time but I catch a glimpse of him going back to his room, and Luke walking a bit back to his room but then coming out to get me at the door. He informs me of what happened and I realize that I was also tipping him over the edge a little. He previously invited me to his room to give me the tokens I was supposed to hand out to others while telling me how much of a pleasure it was to compete with me again, which I thought was a nice gesture so i returned the same. Man I feel really bad for Nur. Me, Alvann, and Luke then play some pusoy dos, laugh at how easy the puzzle box I bought at Bletchley was, and all head to bed. I am now here, frantically typing everything I remember. I probably left out a lot, but if I did I don’t remember it and it probably wasn’t important. This was my IMO experience!

After we went to london, my foot was a bitch but I talked to luke and shit about whatever and thats memorable.

# Reflecting on my non-medal performance

Over the past few days a little bit of the sadness set in on not reaching my goals. In particular at the IMO welcome dinner Nur and Ephraim weren’t there so it was me and the 3 other people in the team who got 3 solves and that made me just a little sad. Seeing the overall performance, noticing how ms Hazel was talking about the other countries mostly, all that. Seeing other people talk about the performance. It made me realize that yes, I fell short in some ways. But it was more the downfall of that albeit low expectation that I had of myself that made me sad. 

“Losing” at the IMO was a good thing for me. I think about myself a lot in regards to my “gifted child” outlook on life and my lack of urgency, discipline, whatever. I guess that’s what made the expectation low for me. It always felt like things would work on for me regardless of how I do because it just has to in a way? I put myself on such a high pedestal that I feel like if I fall I won’t fall too far anyways, and the cushion of the people around me definitely made that worse. I always felt like if I had stricter parents I’d do better but that’s not a good excuse nor do I think it would be right for me. Getting to the IMO but ultimately falling short of what I had wanted has definitely shifted my perspective on what gives my life value. From easy ‘victories’ to simply enjoying the process and working hard in a direction I wanted to go. I feel more alive and passionate about what I am doing, even if it’s just a highschool competition. It’s the direction I want to go, and I’ll go on it. 

 For once I feel like I have a legitimate desire to work hard for the process of it. As cliche as “it’s not the destination it’s the journey” is it really rings true for me. Looking back the best thing that ever happened to me wasn’t doing well on that sir Mar ALP qualifying test, it was missing out on a competition I really wanted to go to. The first competition I wanted to go to gave me direction in my life, and missing out on it made me want to be there. Simply wanting to be at a point where I can feel like I’m not missing out on anything, and I can finally say that for my highschool journey I’ve finally reached the point I wanted to be in. I made it to the competition that I was missing out on. But I never won big, I was always second place in everything almost undeservedly so based on the amount of effort I put in. The first year I was in MTG I went to IMC and ITMO and got silvers in both, second year I went to PLK and got nothing (I was kinda sad back then but it didn’t stick), I went to IMSO science and got a gold that I didn’t care for, I went to SAIMC and got a bronze when Luke and Nur got a silver (I felt really sad), I went to SEAMOX and got a silver (I was very sad), I went to JBMO and got a silver (right behind Nur), and none of this was because I worked hard for long. I fell into it, it felt good being there and I cruised on that. Now that I’ve finally gone to the point where cruising leads no where and now I have a mountain to climb. I’ll climb that mountain.

That being said I’m thankful. I’m glad that I was able to cruise for long with no pressure. All these years of being “happy to be here” has given me ease. I don’t feel weighted by expectations because I never had any, which is why now I feel so much more excited to start climbing. I’m not scared to fall because of it. I’m reminded of when talking to Luke and how he said he was often scared by difficult problems. Without making any assumptions on Luke, I feel like I would feel the same if I had pressure to reach the top of the mountain. Maybe it’s smart to play it safe for learning purposes, but I now have 34 Z level units unlocked, facing the concave side of the mountain, ready to stick my pick in and climb. I know I will fall, and I’ll discover some other way will be better, but I can’t wait to find that out for myself.

